every so often you gotta ask yourself
hey I can't be the first one to have
noticed this I can't be the only person
to figure this out
I had the observation when reading
Bernie Sanders book this is a book which
is obviously to some extent his set of
campaign promises his platform for the
upcoming elections and it's in some in
some respect it's reflecting back on the
elections before the elections he was
basically shut out of by Hillary Clinton
and the corrupt Democrat party machine
it struck me as obvious and yet
everywhere ignored that Bernie Sanders
supports the same policy as Donald Trump
on trade and tariffs now to disclose my
bias here if I had a choice between
voting for Bernie Sanders and Donald
Trump I would vote for Bernie Sanders
it's somewhat hilarious to me that
people presume I'm a conservative or
either than I'm right-wing because I
engage the critique of a pretty sectors
guys you really need you really need
incisive and productive critique within
the left otherwise I mean things go off
the rails real quick but anyway what I
fear out of the left-wing right now
for example from The Young Turks The
Young Turks are one of the most
influential left-of-centre or news
organizations in the world The Young
Turks are again and again attacking
Donald Trump's tariff policy basically
what we call protectionist policy irony
of ironies all of a sudden a left-wing
outlet like The Young Turks are Pro free
trade are Pro neoliberal that's it's not
you guys were like when Obama was in
power it's not what you were like when
you were looking at the TPP
trans-pacific partnership trade
agreement or NAFTA or anything else oh
all of a sudden because it's convenient
to oppose Donald Trump on the tariff
issue there against tariffs well if you
think this policy is bad and evil and
wrong when Donald Trump does it
you must believe it's still bad and evil
and wrong when Bernie Sanders does it
now the basic promise the basic
Bernie Sanders has is to punish China
and punish Mexico for the fact that
during the last 20 years under
conditions of globalized free trade more
and more industry has left the United
States of America to relocate to
precisely China and Mexico those are the
two biggest players in the game that the
two they're the two that will make the
biggest difference you know there are
some others obviously Japan is also a
major trading partner in the United
States but it's no coincidence that it
is mostly against China and Mexico that
both Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump
speak they're both very elderly men
they're both men who can remember what
Detroit was Detroit Michigan used to be
a huge center of cars there's a funny
quip going around I don't know who
coined this in the past they made cars
in Flint Michigan and if you went to
Mexico it wasn't safe to drink the tap
water and today it's the other way
around today they make cars in Mexico
and if you go to places like Flint
Michigan it's near Detroit the water
isn't safe to drink
so the deindustrialization of the United
States of America is a major part of the
artists II justjust for this whole
generation for guys who are this age
Bernie Sanders Donald Trump people like
them for them it's still fundamentally
odd and jarring that Americans are
carrying around cellular phones that are
manufactured in China that they're
driving cars manufactured in Mexico
again we could add Japan to this list of
trade rivals and they see a lot of
advantages and returning to a tariff
regime that would protect American
industry does the term protectionism now
I remember just a couple of years ago
looking into what Bernie Sanders policy
was on immigration and illegal
immigration so this was at the time when
Bernie Sanders Donald Trump and what's
her name again
Hillary Clinton when they were all
viably contesting you know who was who
was gonna be president with that that
race was still going on and of course it
was interesting to see that Hillary
Trump really conceded the point on the
border wall dispute that at a time when
Trump was really making his major
campaign promise quote-unquote build the
wall Hillary Clinton basically responded
by saying that yes in the past she had
voted for building a barrier of some
kind at the border whether it be a fence
or wall that she also we built the wall
and it seemed to me Bernie Sanders was
avoiding the point or that nobody really
knew what Bernie Sanders position was
and I remember clicking through several
pages of his website to get to what his
campaign promise really was what was
Bernie Sanders position on this and
again there was no significant
difference between the sides Bernie
Sanders he definitely had much more
polite and reconciliatory and pleasant
language and presented the idea but
fundamentally Bernie Sanders was totally
opposed to illegal immigration so again
if you think that's a bad policy and a
lot of people on the left wing do a lot
of people in left wing today it's very
popular for them to say that they want
to live in a world without borders it's
to accept all immigrants and even that
they won't accept all illegal immigrants
with open arms that they want to allow
unlimited numbers of people fleeing from
Nicaragua and so on well out of those 3
politicians I've just mentioned there's
actually no significant diversity in
what their policy position is there's
only a difference in rhetoric so on this
same issue coming back to the issue of
trade and in tariffs I had a not really
even a debate at a conversation with
someone who's more of a stereotypical
left winger than myself on the internet
the other day and he was laying into
Donald Trump on on tariffs saying that
somehow terrorists are evil since when
was it left-wing and to think tariffs
are evil since it became so thoughtful
and I just paused him and said look you
know I understand why you're saying this
right now
nobody likes Donald Trump he's very
unpopular but are you aware that Bernie
Sanders would fundamentally do the same
thing Bernie Sanders is looking to
create tariff barriers between China in
the United States United States and
Mexico to protect American industry to
help as she said you know help quote
unquote the working class help the
middle class this sort of thing and the
guys response was telling he said to me
well yeah but if Bernie Sanders
that you know he wouldn't be gross and
crude and offensive and doing it it
wouldn't be a bunch of a bunch of angry
tweets on Twitter you know Bernie
Sanders did it it would be kind of
statesman like and respect now there
there is some truth that but guys if
this is a matter of principle then I
think we have to have the maturity and
detachment to say as a matter of
principle either the policy is right or
it's wrong
whether it's Bernie Sanders or Donald
Trump or Hillary Clinton who is
advancing a policy now on the question
of whether or not tariffs are always bad
or always evil are always economically
disadvantages it's the other question
there's a really interesting example in
the news right now many economists are
arguing and they're arguing persuasively
that the sanctions the trade sanctions
imposed on Russia have had more of a
positive effect on the Russian economy
than a negative effect so to be clear
the argument of people who support
neoliberalism and most people who
support neoconservatism the argument of
those people is that more free trade is
always better that the whole economy
will optimize it will benefit the
country more so if you really believe in
neoliberalism if you really believe in
free trade then you look at the United
States and say look on the whole it's
better that American people have the
freedom to buy cars imported from Mexico
cars imported from China partly of
course because those cars will be
cheaper you should just allow free trade
allow the free market to sort itself out
and a protectionist would say no no no
it's actually important and worthwhile
to to set up barriers to force American
people or to encourage American people
to buy cars manufactured States because
that's in the national interests blah
blah blah it builds up and sustains
industry and certain types of jobs
employment within the United States etc
so neither or theory will ever be
entirely discredited
I just hope empirically neither Theory
can ever be entirely right nor entirely
wrong and we will really address the
example in the current sanctions on
Russia
so sanctions one of the main things that
makes them different from from tariffs
is that rush
didn't choose to cut itself off from
world trade Russia invaded the Ukraine
Russia did a series of politically
objectionable things including the
invasion and occupation of territory
that was legally part of us a different
country of Ukraine and the whole world
sat around and Ronettes Hansen well what
are we gonna do how are we gonna punish
Russia for this or what's going to be
the response and the decision was rather
than starting a war rather than kicking
Russia out of the United Nations their
various things they could have done
rather than ceasing to recognize Russia
the government of russia as illegitimate
government country there are different
diplomatic things you could close all
your embassies bring them out you could
say we don't recognize what amir putin
as legitimate government they're
different different ways you're smart is
that okay the way they're gonna respond
to this is by cutting off trade and it's
interesting to note that this happened
on a legislative level separately in
several different places so for example
that was a totally different debate in
Japan Japan has a border with Russia a
lot of people forget that trade between
Japan and Russia is very important so
Japan had one political response to it
the European Union at another at the
United States at another um I don't know
I don't know about India for example
that'd be interesting looking to how did
India respond to this territorial
sovereignty versus versus free trade so
these these trade sanctions these limits
to trade were imposed with everyone
absolutely assuming they would have a
devastating impact or a negative impact
on Russia now inevitably of course they
must have some negative impact if you
cut off trade there must be some
negative effect for example if you cut
off trade with Mexico cars within the
United States will become more expensive
that's gonna impact some people's lives
negatively if you cut off trade with
Japan and China not just cars will be
more expensive things like cellular
phones kitchen appliances we buy so much
stuff that's manufactured assembled and
so on in China and Japan and also of
course consumer choice becomes narrower
so there were there are very obvious
disadvantages but economists crunching
the numbers and looking at how the
Russian economy reacted we actually
Russia is a huge internal market and as
you can imagine when they cease to be
able to import for example certain types
of food their agricultural sector sprung
to life and
providing more competitive foodstuffs
for within the Russian economy that
apparently across the board and rush of
various industries various productive
segments of the economy have had new
life and vitality breathe them no I said
there must be some sectors of the
economy that have suffered that have
lost jobs that have closed but there
were serious discussions that overall
this was in that bed net benefit now I
think the main argument in favor of the
neoliberal trade regime neoliberal world
order is basically an argument about the
limits of human intelligence and boy
Donald Trump is an example of that you
know Donald Trump tried previously to
set up tariffs that would optimize the
aluminum industry the steel industry
trying to make barriers to the movement
of these specific metals and it was very
debatable is Donald Trump himself
capable of making the decision about
what is really in America's best
interest in steel and aluminum a very
technical it's very difficult to do and
then when you go through all the other
sectors the economy is it really in
America's interest to cut off trade in
oranges and then when you scale it up
and look at trade as a world-spanning
system if each and every country is
engaging in these kinds of protectionist
decisions one of the famous examples was
Japan blocking the import of hockey
sticks and sports equipment from Canada
Canadian government was disputing this
as you can imagine another example is
you know the bizarre legal machination
surrounding New Zealand's dairy industry
well hold on the story
New Zealand wanting to export their
dairy products to the whole world and
this kind of thing and a lot of
countries saying no they want to protect
their own dairy market it's ridiculous
ok anyway you know if every country is
trying to make ad hoc strategic
decisions in their own best interests
for one thing some of those decisions
won't really be able to be in their best
interest like oh well we thought we'd
improve things by cutting off the trade
in steel so we produce more steel of our
own but the actual knot
on effects turned out to be this this
and this that were unforeseen effects
for various industries or it ends up
cutting you off from certain exports you
wanted to make yeah it really is a kind
of the argument for unlimited free trade
is basically keep it simple stupid if
Canada and Japan come to an agreement
and say look look Japan we're gonna you
know we're gonna let you export all of
your special Goods the special goods you
create that are uniquely Japanese to
Canada and the Canadian people can buy
your stuff and you have to let us export
the few things were really good at we
make better hockey sticks than you and
Japan and there are enough people
playing ice hockey in Japan but these
things you could and let things sort
themselves out however this is now the
year 2019 that argument sounded a lot
more persuasive before we all saw
exactly what unfolded in Detroit
Michigan it's for exactly people this
generation you know Bernie Sanders
generation who can who can see what
happened to the whole American economy
you know in a perfect world could there
have been a strategy for the United
States making a better transition to a
post industrialized the industrialized
Society and would that strategy actually
also entail much more of a hard
anti-immigration anti-illegal
immigration stance because if
fundamentally there are fewer jobs and
fewer high-quality jobs in your economy
due to the industrialization how can you
possibly match that with ever-increasing
numbers of immigrants both legal and
illegal immigrants a lot of things there
don't make sense especially if your
fundamental objective is to have higher
wages a better quality of life for both
poor people and no class people which is
his agenda so it seems to me that right
now we're in a position where a lot of
the assumptions that were unquestioned
about neoliberalism on both the left and
the right are finally falling apart but
nobody is really putting forward any
coherent program for set of a set of
answers on the contrary a lot of what
you're getting are the same policies
presented in left-wing rhetoric and
right-wing rhetoric and I just heard a
lecture from London School of Economics
pointed this is actually a measure of
phenomenon in Europe and in North
America in the whole Western world the
problem that the meaningful difference
in your choice between left and right
has gotten smaller and smaller in recent
decades everyone was hoping we'd have a
sudden break we'd have new and
meaningful difference after the 2008
financial crisis that definitely has not
yet happened okay
so summing it up if you think about a
kind of four part logical diagram you've
got people who are Pro tariffs and
people who are anti tariffs you've got
people who are Pro sanctions and people
who are anti sanctions and let me tell
you right now within the left wing these
are hot hot issues and I think you did a
poll the mainstream left groups like The
Young Turks the mainstream left-wing
position is that any good left-wing
person is anti tariffs and also 80
sanctions so for example they don't want
sanctions against North Korea
they don't want sanctions against Iran
they don't want sanctions go against
Russia which is a little strange they're
different kind of historical and ethical
reasons whether it says but they don't
want sanctions against Cuba there's an
example that tugs at left-wing horns so
bizarrely at a time when the left-wing
is saying that the people they want to
support most are the working-class our
manufacturing jobs etc the ethical
positions they're committed to are 100%
disadvantageous to the industrial
working class and I think it's kind of
hidden in plain sight as I say I'm not
the only one who mentioned that Bernie
Sanders so-called populist so-called
working-class platform some people in
the press have noticed this it is in
fact contrary to that left-wing
commitment and it's instead quite
compatible with the policies now pursued
by Donald J Trump